# Incident: 2025-04-08 09-25-48

## Summary

Between approximately 15:25 and 15:36 UTC on April 8th 2025, 12 users encountered errors when attempting to order pizzas. The event was caused by a chaos attack of the JWT Pizza Factory microservice, preventing all pizzas ordered during the outage from being delivered.

The event was detected within minutes by Grafana, and relevant engineers were notified immediately. This high priority incident affected all users who attempted to order a pizza during the outage.

## Detection

This incident was detected when the Grafana OnCall alert tracking failed pizza orders was triggered and Evan Smith was texted. Evan Smith was the engineer on call during this time. Evan Smith was first notified about the issue at 15:28, and again at 15:33 and 15:38.

When the incident first occurred, Evan Smith was walking to campus to his CS 260 class and did not have his computer out, which delayed his response by roughly 6 minutes.

## Impact

For 11 minutes between 15:25 UTC and 15:36 UTC on 04/08/25, users visiting JWT Pizza (pizza.rhythum.click) received an error when attempting to order pizzas. Users's saw the message "Failed to fulfill order at factory" after attempting to order their pizzas. This incident affected 12 orders and prevented a total of 24 pizzas from being ordered properly. This impacted all users who attempted to order pizzas during the outage. It appears that the inability to order pizzas was the only disruption caused by this incident. In addition, all customers were charged for their orders that they never received.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _15:25_ - The first user had an issue ordering pizzas.
- _15:28_ - Evan Smith was notified of the issue via SMS.
- _15:33_ - Evan Smith was notified again via SMS.
- _15:34_ - Evan Smith started looking for a fix for the issue.
- _15:36_ - Evan Smith found a link in the failed JWT Pizza Factory responses which stopped the chaos attack.
- _15:36_ - Users stopped having issues ordering pizzas.
- _15:38_ - Evan Smith was notified a third time via SMS.
- _15:38_ - Evan Smith resolved the Grafana alert.
- _15:41_ - Evan Smith confirms that no more users are experiencing issues using the Grafana metrics.

## Response

After receiving a message about failed pizza orders at 15:28 UTC, Evan Smith, the current on call engineer, came online at 15:36 UTC. He started inspecting responses from the JWT Pizza Factory microservice, which is responsible for pizza orders. No other engineers were notified of the issue.

Evan Smith did not acknowledge the Grafana alert until after he had fixed the issue. This could have helped prevent others from being notified on the team when Evan was working on a fix. Because of this, a third message was sent out just after the issue had been resolved.

Users are in the process of being refunded for their failed orders and are being given free pizza for life.

## Root cause

A bug in connection pool handling led to leaked connections under failure conditions, combined with lack of visibility into connection state.
The issue was caused by a chaos attack which was triggered on the JWT Pizza Factory endpoint. 

During this time, the JWT Pizza Service endpoint (/api/order) returned 500 errors with this response body.

```json
{
  "message": "Failed to fulfill order at factory",
  "reportPizzaCreationErrorToPizzaFactoryUrl": "https://cs329.cs.byu.edu/api/report?apiKey=[API_KEY]&fixCode=[FIX_CODE]"
}
```

## Resolution

Evan Smith resolved the chaos attack after visiting the url found in the 500 responses coming from JWT Pizza Factory.

## Prevention

This seems to be a one time issue. However, it is possible for someone to trigger the chaos attack again. It may be worth looking into using the internal API for fulfilling pizza orders, as this is critical for the business.

## Action items

1. Move the JWT Pizza Factory code into the JWT Pizza backend to limit external dependencies.
2. Refund customers their lost bitcoin from the 12 orders.
3. Email all affected customers and give them free pizza for life.
